---
layout: post
title: Everyone Can Write Bad Code
---


### It's Simpler than You Think

Writing bad code is simpler than you think. Yada-yadas will make you believe that it takes special skills to craft junk code, that only a "chosen few" among us are capable of doing it. They may trick you into thinking that it takes a lot of apathy, the ability to hand wave, the special gut feeling to make bad assumptions, and a keen, sharp focus on the short term (or smaller picture). Sounds like a lot, doesn't it?

Well, to tell you the truth, it's not that hard. For those of you who strive to write poor code, with a special focus on screwing up on _big data_ jobs, I have compiled a set of action items that will help you in embarking on this journey. 

A word of warning is in order. As you read through the 16 points, you may get demotivated. You may think you'll never be one of _them_. To fight such dark thoughts, you may want to think about the developers you had written off as  _good_; haven't you seen them doing one of these? If they can do it, so can you!  



### 0. Don't Unit Test

### 1. Don't Waste Time Thinking About Names

### 2. Documentation is Useless

### 3. Either Comment Nowhere, or Comment Everywhere

### 4. If You Think it Will Work, it Will Work

### 5. Early Optimization is Evil so Write Stupid Code

### 6. Head start: Start Coding Before You Know What's to be Done

### 7. Specifications less than 100 pages are useless

### 8. The First Test should be on a Billion Lines, in Distributed Mode

### 9. Your Work is Good Enough to Live on _master_ branch at All Times

### A. No One Can Review Your Code Once It's Written, Ideally Not Even You

### B. If the following `hugeData.flatMap().reduceByKey().groupByKey().map(_.toString)` throws a OOM, Spark must be a fad.

### C. Big O Matters for People In School taking Algorithms Courses

### D. If The Job Finished, the Data has to be Right

### E. If the Job Crashes on a 100 Cores, All You Need is 200 Cores

### F. Never look at the Data


thatsIt. now_go_rock!
